Developer guide
===============

The BlenderBIM Add-on takes a unique approach to authoring BIM data. Traditional
BIM authoring apps create features that are tailored for a single discipline's
paradigm, such as a 3D environment, or a spreadsheet view, and store their data
structure in a schema that is unique to their application. In order to
interoperate with others, there is an export or import process that translates
between their bespoke schema to and from open data standards. The most famous
ISO standard for BIM is IFC. After this translation, they then serialise it
typically into a format, which may be saved to disk.

The BlenderBIM Add-on does things differently.

The BlenderBIM Add-on does not have its own bespoke data structure and does not
import or export. The BlenderBIM Add-on uses ISO open data standards directly in
memory. Most commonly, this is IFC data. We will place a focus on IFC on this
guide, but the reader should be aware that the BlenderBIM Add-on also takes the
same approach to dealing with other open data standards, like Brickschema or
BCF. The same concepts will apply. We can call this Native OpenBIM authoring,
which is a paradigm shift from traditional BIM which relies on translated IFC
data.

Every user operation reads or writes this data structure in memory, and the IFC
data becomes the source of truth for all data. There is no such thing as an
import or export. The data is always represented in IFC. When a BIM model is
opened or saved, it is simply a serialisation or deserialisation operation. This
also means that you are using Blender simply as an interface to interact with
IFC, and the ``.blend`` container is largely unnecessary, as nothing of
significance is stored in the Blender system, it is simply a snapshot of your
working session.

Due to this significant difference, hacking on the BlenderBIM Add-on requires
knowledge not just about how Blender works, but also how open data standards
like IFC works.

Just show me the code!
----------------------

Sometimes, the best way to learn how to hack on a project is to just start
hacking away. The BlenderBIM Add-on code is separated into modules. Each module
focuses on a particular topic of BIM. Most modules are self-contained, but
sometimes they connect to one another, just like how BIM works.

The BlenderBIM Add-on comes with a secret demo module which is basically a hello
world coding tutorial which teaches you about all the moving parts. It's far
more interesting to read this code rather than 15 pages of abstract software
architecture flow charts and diagrams. The code and its comments will guide you
through the process.

Before playing with the demo module, you may want to switch to using a source
installation. See :ref:`blenderbim/installation` for details.

To see the demo module in action, you'll need to enable it. In
``src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/__init__.py``, uncomment the line for the demo
module. When you restart Blender, you will see a new demo panel in your scene
properties interface tab. Have fun!

Here are all the files associated with the demo module. Feel free to read them
in any order. Each file is heavily commented with explanations about what each
line of code does. Change some of the code, reload Blender, and see what
happens!

::

    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/module/demo/__init__.py
    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/module/demo/operator.py
    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/module/demo/prop.py
    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/module/demo/ui.py
    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/module/demo/data.py
    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/core/demo.py
    src/blenderbim/blenderbim/tool/demo.py


Wow! That's a lot of files needed for a hello world! Don't worry, it's mostly
tutorial comments and it's there to teach you the basics from how Blender's
add-on system works, how interfaces work, to how the BlenderBIM Add-on works,
and how to test and structure it so that you can build incredibly complex
features in a maintainable way.

Tests for quality checking also exist. The system is designed so that you can
do "Test Driven Development". You can find the tests here:

::

    src/blenderbim/test/bim/feature/demo.feature
    src/blenderbim/test/core/test_demo.py
    src/blenderbim/test/tool/test_demo.py

Not all developers, especially those learning how to code, are familiar with
testing and how to write tests. That's OK! Feel free to ignore the tests at
first until you get a bit more comfortable with coding, and others can help
guide you when you're ready to make the leap. Don't let this stop you from
building things, others can also help write tests for you and clean your code.
It's a great way to learn!

Once you're through, you should be able to understand how most of the BlenderBIM
Add-on is built and where to find things.

There are many Blender Python tutorials out there. A good place to start is the
`Start coding for Blender
<https://wiki.osarch.org/index.php?title=Start_coding_for_Blender>`__ from the
OSArch Wiki. In addition, the Blender text editor comes with a menu called
``Templates > Python`` which gives you a whole list of example code of how to
create an add-on which creates objects, creates gizmos, new buttons, interfaces,
and so on. This is a great way to try out how to build different extensions.

Naturally, if you just want to tweak the BlenderBIM Add-on or build a small
feature just for yourself, you're free to ignore this advice, skip all the
tests, and just write half the code in a single file and it'll get the job done.

Software architecture
---------------------

If code isn't good enough for you and you want to learn more about why the code
is structured the way it is, here is a list of design principles we follow:

1.  Big systems are hard to maintain. Break big systems into small systems.
2.  Separate abstract code from concrete code. Start with abstract code, and
    deal with the details later.
3.  Good code reads like poetry. Every usecase should have a poem.
4.  Separate UI code from domain logic. UI code should be as dumb as possible.
5.  Follow the Unix philosophy. We're dealing with a big industry problem here.
    Building a shared ecosystem of tools is better than one behemoth.
6.  Everything should be testable. You should be able to test first.
7.  Have different types of tests. Inversely correlate test speed and scope.
8.  Community first. Allow beginner programmers to join in the fun! Code should
    feel easy, not like a course in design pattern jargon.
9.  Incremental change, not waterfall. Don't trash and rebuild. Refactor and
    redesign one commit at a time. With each commit, ask if you're making the
    code nicer.
10. Perfect is the enemy of the good. Half broken is better than completely
    broken.

The rest of this contains nasty software architecture jargon. If that's not your
thing, stop reading now.

The BlenderBIM Add-on code may be understood in three separate layers: **Delivery**,
**Domain**, and **Data**. The BlenderBIM Add-on architecture separates these
three layers from one another. Because they are separate, they can be tested and
built separately.

The **Delivery** mechanism is how the application is delivered to
the user and handles user interactions. It covers the interface and triggering
events as inputs into the application, and rendering responses.

As advertised in the name, the **Delivery** mechanism is based on **Blender**.
**Blender** is a well established 3D platform. Out of the box, it provides an
incredibly advanced interface to allow users to interact with geometry. The
delivery mechanism code extends Blender extensively, including new *Operations*
that users can perform, new *Properties* to store custom data, and new *UI*
layouts to display information.

When an event such as an *Operation* is triggered, the **Delivery** mechanism
executes the **Domain** layer through dependency injection. The **Domain** layer
will then decide how to process this input.

The **Domain** layer is divided into two halves: an abstract *Core* and concrete
*Tools*. The *Core* describes abstract, high-level application logic flow for
every single possible usecase in application. The *Tools* actually implement
this abstract logic, and figure out how things actually work, whether it is
manipulating the Blender scene, writing and reading files, building new IFC
graph relationships, and so on. The **Domain** layer also has interface classes
to describe what it needs.

Whenever the application needs to remember or store information, it does so
using a **Data** repository. The data ensures that stored information confirms
to a defined schema and is valid, and can be retrieved later. Some data is
stored in Blender, such as information about your working session and active
scene. Other data is stored in IFC, such as all the relationships in your BIM
model. We mention **Data** specifically because OpenBIM data authoring is such a
big aspect of the BlenderBIM Add-on. In fact, it's so big that most of it is
completely separated from the BlenderBIM Add-on code and lives elsewhere.

For example, all the code that handles IFC data, which you can think of as a
graph database, is in a completelyÂ separate codebase, even under a different
software license. You can find it in the IfcOpenShell-python API module. Many of
the various data processing functions are built as separate Unix-like utilities,
even with their own CLI. This **Data** layer isn't a single folder of code we
can point to, it's an ecosystem of libraries and utilities that we want to share
with the entire industry.

Delivery architecture
---------------------

TODO: Continue writing.

Past this point needs to be reviewed. Continue reading but don't trust anything
blindly.

The IFC based system takes care of reading and writing IFC data using
the IfcOpenShell library. This system is agnostic of Blender and the BlenderBIM
Add-on. Data is read from the IFC dataset using ``Data`` classes. Data is
written into the IFC dataset using ``Usecase`` classes.

The Blender based system takes care of turning Blender into a BIM authoring
client. Like all Blender add-ons, ``Operators`` define user operations, such as
those triggered when pressing a button. ``UI`` defines the interface, such as
the layout of buttons, input fields, and panels. Finally, ``Props`` define
properties that Blender keeps track of, typically for interface input fields or
user settings.

The Blender system depends on the IFC system. The IFC system does not depend on
the Blender system.

.. image:: architecture.png

..
    digraph G {rankdir=LR;
      node [fontname = "Handlee", shape=rect];

      subgraph cluster_0 {
        node [style=filled,color=pink];

        IfcOpenShell -> Data;
        Usecase -> IfcOpenShell;

        label = "*IFC based*";
        fontsize = 20;
        color=grey
      }

      subgraph cluster_1 {
        node [style=filled,color=lightblue];

        Operators -> Usecase
        Data->UI
        Data->Operators

        Operators -> Props
        Props -> Operators
        Props -> UI

        label = "*Blender based*";
        fontsize = 20;
        color=grey
      }
    }

Of course, there are many details that we are glossing over, but it provides a
good representation of data flow in the BlenderBIM Add-on.

The code for these two systems may be found here:

- `ifcopenshell <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/ifcopenshell-python>`__
- `blenderbim <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/blenderbim>`__

Module architecture
-------------------

Because BIM authoring is a vast field, the architecture is further grouped into
modules. Modules include things like project related capabilities, structural
related capabilities, costing related capabilities, and so on.

Each module consists an IFC based system, which does all the IFC manipulations,
and a Blender based counterpart, which exposes all of these operations to the
user via the Blender interface.

.. image:: module-architecture.png

..
    digraph G {
        node [fontname = "Handlee", shape=rect];
        subgraph cluster_1 {
            rank=same;
            {
                blender1 [label="Blender", style=filled, color=lightblue];
                ifc1 [label="IFC", style=filled, color=pink];
                ifc1 -> blender1
                blender1 -> ifc1
            }

            label = "*Project Module*";
            fontsize = 20;
            color=grey
        }
        subgraph cluster_2 {
            rank=same;
            {
                blender2 [label="Blender", style=filled, color=lightblue];
                ifc2 [label="IFC", style=filled, color=pink];
                ifc2 -> blender2
                blender2 -> ifc2
            }

            label = "*Structural Module*";
            fontsize = 20;
            color=grey
        }
        subgraph cluster_3 {
            rank=same;
            {
                blender3 [label="Blender", style=filled, color=lightblue];
                ifc3 [label="IFC", style=filled, color=pink];
                ifc3 -> blender3
                blender3 -> ifc3
            }

            label = "*XYZ Module*";
            fontsize = 20;
            color=grey
        }
    }

Modules are not arbitrary divisions, but instead reflect subgraphs of IFC
relationships that minimise overlap with other subgraphs. Therefore modules are
mostly self contained, and allow developers to work on a single portion of the
code with relative certainty that their actions will not affects other
developers. Sometimes, overlap is inevitable.

There are over 40 modules, so we won't list them here.

- `IFC modules <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/ifcopenshell-python/ifcopenshell/api>`__
- `Blender modules <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/blenderbim/blenderbim/bim/module>`__

IfcOpenShell Architecture
-------------------------

Manipulating IFC data is not simple. IFC may be serialised into multiple
formats, multiple schema versions must be supported, and geometry may be defined
in a highly parametric or implicit manner, which geometry kernels do not
natively support. All this heavy lifting is performed by the IfcOpenShell
library.

The IfcOpenShell library consists of a C++ based core. Its geometry processing
is done using OpenCascade, and optionally CGAL as an experimental option. By the
time the BlenderBIM Add-on interacts with IFC, it uses the IfcOpenShell Python
bindings, so all IFC data is already deserialised into Python objects. The inner
workings of the C++ base is out of scope.

.. image:: ifcopenshell-architecture.png

..
    digraph G {rankdir=LR;
        node [fontname = "Handlee", shape=rect, style=filled,color=pink];
        IfcOpenShell [label="IfcOpenShell C++", color=grey]
        ifcopenshell [label="IfcOpenShell-python"]
        OpenCascade [color=grey]
        CGAL [color=grey]

        OpenCascade -> IfcOpenShell
        CGAL -> IfcOpenShell
        IfcOpenShell -> ifcopenshell
        ifcopenshell -> Core
        ifcopenshell -> Utils
        ifcopenshell -> API
        API -> Module01
        API -> Module02
        API -> Module03
        Module03[label="..."]
        Module01 -> Data
        Module01 -> Usecase
    }


IfcOpenShell offers a core set of low-level functionality to read and write this
data. An example of the core functionality would be:

.. code-block:: python

    import ifcopenshell
    model = ifcopenshell.open("foo.ifc")
    wall = model.create_entity("IfcWall")
    wall.Name = "Foobar"

Core functions are simple read and write operations with no post processing.
Core functions also include geometry processing, which converts IFC geometry
into OpenCascade objects.

Sometimes, there are repetitive actions that need to be performed. These
functions are grouped into a ``util`` module. These include utility functions
for coordinate calculations, date conversions, filtering elements, unit
conversions, and more. Utility functions make no assumption about the context in
which they are used, and so perform highly specific tasks and nothing else.
Here's an example of utility functionality:

.. code-block:: python

    import ifcopenshell
    import ifcopenshell.util.date
    import ifcopenshell.util.geolocation
    start = ifcopenshell.util.date.ifc2datetime(task_time.ScheduleStart)
    coordinates = ifcopenshell.util.geolocation.local2global(matrix, eastings, ...)

When authoring, core and utility functions are usually too low-level. To cater
for this, a high level API is provided. The API is divided into mostly isolated
modules, each module representing a distinct set of concepts in the IFC schema.
Unlike the util module, these API modules are highly context-sensitive, and
assume that you intend to be authoring native IFC.

This context-sensitive assumption means that the functions within the modules
are designed around typical usecases in an authoring environment. It performs
all the necessary manipulations to achieve a domain-specific usecase. Authoring
is complex and requires a deep knowledge of IFC to perform correctly and ensure
that the IFC graph state is well maintained. Typically, any authoring operation
that does not use the API is likely to contain mistakes.

Each module contains a Data class to extract various IFC data related to the IFC
concept that the module relates to. The ``Data`` classes parse the complex IFC
graph and convert it into a cache of primitive Python data. The ``Usecase``
clases perform a defined user operation. Here's an example of it in action:

.. code-block:: python

    import ifcopenshell.api
    ifcopenshell.api.run("grid.create_grid_axis", model, ...)
    ifcopenshell.api.run("structural.add_structural_load", model, ...)

Because the API performs all the IFC manipulations to achieve a usecase, no
further interaction is required in a typical native IFC authoring environment.
For this reason, the BlenderBIM Add-on only interacts with the API for its
authoring capabilities.

The code for IfcOpenShell's various systems can be found here:

- `ifcopenshell (core) <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/ifcopenshell-python/ifcopenshell>`__
- `ifcopenshell.util <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/ifcopenshell-python/ifcopenshell/util>`__
- `ifcopenshell.api <https://github.com/IfcOpenShell/IfcOpenShell/tree/v0.6.0/src/ifcopenshell-python/ifcopenshell/api>`__


BlenderBIM Add-on architecture
------------------------------

TODO
